README.md, before:

<!--
Copyright (C) 2023 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# hictk

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green)](./LICENSE)
[![docs](https://readthedocs.org/projects/hictk/badge/?version=latest)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Ubuntu CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/ubuntu-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/ubuntu-ci.yml)
[![MacOS CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/macos-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/macos-ci.yml)
[![Windows CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/windows-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/windows-ci.yml)
[![Build Dockerfile](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/build-dockerfile.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/build-dockerfile.yml)
[![Fuzzy testing](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/fuzzy-testing.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/fuzzy-testing.yml)
[![Download from Bioconda](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/bioconda/hictk?label=bioconda&logo=Anaconda)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/hictk)

[![Zenodo DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.8214220.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8214220)

---

hictk is a blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files.

This repository hosts `hictk`: a set of CLI tools to work with Cooler, as well as `libhictk`: the C++ library underlying `hictk`.

Python bindings for `libhictk` are available at [paulsengroup/hictkpy](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkpy).

hictk is capable of reading files in `.cool`, `.mcool`, `.scool` and `.hic` format (including hic v9) as well as writing `.hic`, `.cool` and `.mcool` files.

## Installing hictk

hictk is developed on Linux and tested on Linux, MacOS and Windows.

hictk can be installed using containers, bioconda or directly from source. Refer to [Installation](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/installation.html) for more information.

## Running hictk

hictk provides the following subcommands:

| subcommand             | description                                                                        |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **balance**            | Balance HiC matrices using ICE, SCALE or VC.                                       |
| **convert**            | Convert matrices to a different format.                                            |
| **dump**               | Dump data from .hic and Cooler files to stdout.                                    |
| **fix-mcool**          | Fix corrupted .mcool files.                                                        |
| **load**               | Build .cool and .hic files from interactions in various text formats.              |
| **merge**              | Merge multiple Cooler or .hic files into a single file.                            |
| **rename-chromosomes** | Rename chromosomes found in a Cooler file.                                         |
| **validate**           | Validate .hic and Cooler files.                                                    |
| **zoomify**            | Convert single-resolution Cooler and .hic files to multi-resolution by coarsening. |

Refer to [Quickstart (CLI)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickstart_cli.html) and [CLI Reference](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cli_reference.html) for more details.

## Using libhictk

libhictk can be installed in various way, including with Conan and CMake FetchContent. Section [Quickstart (API)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickstart_api.html) of hictk documentation contains further details on how this can be accomplished.

[Quickstart (API)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/quickstart_api.html) also showcases the basic functionality offered by libhictk. For more complex examples refer to the sample programs under the [examples/](./examples/) folder as well as to the [source code](./src/hictk/) of hictk.

The public C++ API of hictk is documented in the [C++ API Reference](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/cpp_api/index.html) section of hictk documentation.

## Citing

If you use hictk in you reaserch, please cite the following publication:

Roberto Rossini, Jonas Paulsen, hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files
_Bioinformatics_, Volume 40, Issue 7, July 2024, btae408, [https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408)

<details>
<summary>BibTex</summary>

```bibtex
@article{hictk,
    author = {Rossini, Roberto and Paulsen, Jonas},
    title = "{hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files}",
    journal = {Bioinformatics},
    volume = {40},
    number = {7},
    pages = {btae408},
    year = {2024},
    month = {06},
    issn = {1367-4811},
    doi = {10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/40/7/btae408/58385157/btae408.pdf},
}
```

</details>

Commit message:

Update the docs (#236)
* Update docstrings

* Update the README

* Update CLI reference

* Update requirements.txt for the docs

* Update test dataset download instructions

* Add docs for hictk metadata

* Update CLI reference

* Update docs for C++ API

* Update docs and tutorials for hictk

* hictk load: document supported compression algorithms

* Update docs for To*Matrix transformers

* Update CITATION.cff and add workflow to lint CITATION.cff

* Rewrite generate_cli_reference script in python

* Fix incorrect display of std::uint8_t default values in the CLI help message

* Remove unnecessary extension from docs/conf.py

* Switch to using build.commands in .readthedocs.yaml in preparation for RTD Addons

* Check for broken links when building the docs

* Add script to automate updating doc links in index.rst

* Update links to the doc in the readme

README.md, after:

<!--
Copyright (C) 2023 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>

SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT
-->

# hictk

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-green)](./LICENSE)
[![docs](https://readthedocs.org/projects/hictk/badge/?version=latest)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
[![Ubuntu CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/ubuntu-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/ubuntu-ci.yml)
[![MacOS CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/macos-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/macos-ci.yml)
[![Windows CI](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/windows-ci.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/windows-ci.yml)
[![Build Dockerfile](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/build-dockerfile.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/build-dockerfile.yml)
[![Fuzzy testing](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/fuzzy-testing.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictk/actions/workflows/fuzzy-testing.yml)
[![Download from Bioconda](https://img.shields.io/conda/vn/bioconda/hictk?label=bioconda&logo=Anaconda)](https://anaconda.org/bioconda/hictk)

[![Zenodo DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/DOI/10.5281/zenodo.8214220.svg)](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.8214220)

---

hictk is a blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files.

This repository hosts `hictk`: a set of CLI tools to work with Cooler, as well as `libhictk`: the C++ library underlying `hictk`.

Python bindings for `libhictk` are available at [paulsengroup/hictkpy](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkpy), while R bindings are published at [paulsengroup/hictkR](https://github.com/paulsengroup/hictkR).

hictk is capable of reading files in `.cool`, `.mcool`, `.scool` and `.hic` format (including hic v9) as well as writing `.hic`, `.cool` and `.mcool` files.

## Installing hictk

hictk is developed on Linux and tested on Linux, MacOS and Windows.

hictk can be installed using containers, bioconda or directly from source. Refer to [Installation](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/installation.html) for more information.

## Running hictk

hictk provides the following subcommands:

| subcommand             | description                                                                                    |
| ---------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **balance**            | Balance Hi-C files using ICE, SCALE, or VC.                                                    |
| **convert**            | Convert Hi-C files between different formats.                                                  |
| **dump**               | Read interactions and other kinds of data from .hic and Cooler files and write them to stdout. |
| **fix-mcool**          | Fix corrupted .mcool files.                                                                    |
| **load**               | Build .cool and .hic files from interactions in various text formats.                          |
| **merge**              | Merge multiple Cooler or .hic files into a single file.                                        |
| **metadata**           | Print file metadata to stdout.                                                                 |
| **rename-chromosomes** | Rename chromosomes found in a Cooler file.                                                     |
| **validate**           | Validate .hic and Cooler files.                                                                |
| **zoomify**            | Convert single-resolution Cooler and .hic files to multi-resolution by coarsening.             |

Refer to [Quickstart (CLI)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/quickstart_cli.html) and [CLI Reference](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cli_reference.html) for more details.

## Using libhictk

libhictk can be installed in various way, including with Conan and CMake FetchContent. Section [Quickstart (API)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/quickstart_api.html) of hictk documentation contains further details on how this can be accomplished.

[Quickstart (API)](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/quickstart_api.html) also showcases the basic functionality offered by libhictk. For more complex examples refer to the sample programs under the [examples/](./examples/) folder as well as to the [source code](./src/hictk/) of hictk.

The public C++ API of hictk is documented in the [C++ API Reference](https://hictk.readthedocs.io/en/stable/cpp_api/index.html) section of hictk documentation.

## Citing

If you use hictk in you reaserch, please cite the following publication:

Roberto Rossini, Jonas Paulsen, hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files
_Bioinformatics_, Volume 40, Issue 7, July 2024, btae408, [https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408](https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408)

<details>
<summary>BibTex</summary>

```bibtex
@article{hictk,
    author = {Rossini, Roberto and Paulsen, Jonas},
    title = "{hictk: blazing fast toolkit to work with .hic and .cool files}",
    journal = {Bioinformatics},
    volume = {40},
    number = {7},
    pages = {btae408},
    year = {2024},
    month = {06},
    issn = {1367-4811},
    doi = {10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    url = {https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btae408},
    eprint = {https://academic.oup.com/bioinformatics/article-pdf/40/7/btae408/58385157/btae408.pdf},
}
```

</details>
