docs/reading_interactions.rst, before:

..
   Copyright (C) 2023 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>
   SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Reading interactions
####################

``hictk`` supports reading interactions from .hic and .cool files through the ``hictk dump`` command.

By default, interactions are dumped to stdout in COO format (row, column, count):

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

Use option ``--join`` to instead dump interactions in bedgraph2 format:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool --resolution 1000 --join | head -n 3

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1745
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1766
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	1078
  ...

All operations work on .hic as well as .[m]cool files:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool --resolution 1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool::/resolutions/1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

Dump balanced or expected interactions:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --balance SCALE

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1681.679565429688
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1386.554565429688
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	878.9703979492188
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --matrix-type expected

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	88.33206176757812
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	63.43805313110352
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	31.78345680236816
  ...

Dump interactions overlapping a region of interest:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --range chr3L:20,000,000-25,000,000

  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20002000	20003000	2390
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20007000	20008000	1285
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20012000	20013000	490
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --range chr3L:20,000,000-25,000,000 --range2 chrX

  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	52000	  53000	  1
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	157000	158000	1
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	352000	353000	1
  ...

Dump tables other than pixels:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table chroms

  chr2L	23513712
  chr2R	25286936
  chr3L	28110227
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table normalizations

  SCALE
  VC
  VC_SQRT

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table resolutions

  1000
  5000
  10000
  ...


Dump cis or trans interactions only:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --cis-only --join

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1745
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1766
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	1078
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --trans-only --join

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	27000	28000	1
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	322000	323000	1
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	397000	398000	1
  ...

Commit message:

Update docs and tutorials for hictk
[no ci]

docs/reading_interactions.rst, after:

..
   Copyright (C) 2023 Roberto Rossini <roberros@uio.no>
   SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Reading interactions
####################

``hictk`` supports reading interactions from .hic and .cool files through the ``hictk dump`` command.

By default, interactions are dumped to stdout in COO format (row, column, count):

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

Use option ``--join`` to instead dump interactions in bedgraph2 format:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool --resolution 1000 --join | head -n 3

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1745
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1766
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	1078
  ...

All operations work on .hic as well as .[m]cool files:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool --resolution 1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.mcool::/resolutions/1000

  7   7	  1745
  7   12  1766
  7   17  1078
  ...

Dump balanced or expected interactions:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --balance SCALE

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1681.679565429688
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1386.554565429688
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	878.9703979492188
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --matrix-type expected

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	88.33206176757812
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	63.43805313110352
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	31.78345680236816
  ...

Dump interactions overlapping a region of interest:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --range chr3L:20,000,000-25,000,000

  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20002000	20003000	2390
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20007000	20008000	1285
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chr3L	20012000	20013000	490
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --join --range chr3L:20,000,000-25,000,000 --range2 chrX

  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	52000	  53000	  1
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	157000	158000	1
  chr3L	20002000	20003000	chrX	352000	353000	1
  ...

Dump tables other than pixels:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table chroms

  chr2L	23513712
  chr2R	25286936
  chr3L	28110227
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table normalizations

  SCALE
  VC
  VC_SQRT

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --table resolutions

  1000
  5000
  10000
  ...


See hictk dump help message for the complete list of supported tables.


Dump cis or trans interactions only:

.. code-block:: console

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --cis-only --join

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	7000	8000	1745
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	12000	13000	1766
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2L	17000	18000	1078
  ...

  user@dev:/tmp$ hictk dump data/4DNFIZ1ZVXC8.hic9 --resolution 1000 --trans-only --join

  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	27000	28000	1
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	322000	323000	1
  chr2L	7000	8000	chr2R	397000	398000	1
  ...
